Reviewing Datasource guide (#32802)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/datasource.adoc

and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
[id="datasources"]

> = Configure datasources in Quarkus

Reviewer: @MichalMaler & @Sanne - The Vale linter spelling warning on the term `datasources` is creating noise in this PR.

As this is an accepted term in Quarkus, I think we should add an exception to this rule? WDYT?

Author: Yeah, I agree :)

Reviewer 2: Well. This is the discussion. We confuse "data source" (noun) with "datasource" (the code artifact.

Technically speaking, the title should be "Configure data sources in Quarkus". Depends on how semantically correct we want to be. Quarkus has habitually used the two forms interchangably, but that doesn't mean it is correct. ;)

(the id can be datasources, or should be datasource if we want to stick with file conventions... ).

include::_attributes.adoc[]

> :categories: data,getting-started

Reviewer: Should this topic be found when filtering for Reactive content on the landing page? If so, add reactive here:

```suggestion
:categories: data,getting-started,reactive
```

> :summary: Use a unified a configuration model to define datasources for Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) and Reactive drivers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:summary: Use a unified configuration model to define datasources for Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) and Reactive drivers.
```

Author: Nice catch, will apply.

////
Note for contributors and writers:
In text, use `data source` in code, `datasource` or `DataSource` is more common.
See, https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jdbc/basics/connecting.html
////

Applications use datasources to access relational databases.
Quarkus provides a unified configuration model to define datasources for Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) and Reactive database drivers.

Quarkus uses link:https://agroal.github.io/[Agroal] and link:https://vertx.io/[Vert.x] to provide high-performance, scaleable data source connection pooling for JDBC and reactive drivers.

> The `jdbc-*` and `reactive-*` extensions provide build time optimizations and integrate configured data sources with Quarkus features like security, health checks, and metrics.

Author: Oh yes, good spot. This needs to be some latest copy/paste error :). Fixing.

For more details about consuming and using a reactive datasource, see the Quarkus xref:reactive-sql-clients.adoc[Reactive SQL clients] guide.

////
Future references to all other parts of this doc.
////

== Get started with configuring `datasources` in Quarkus

> To start configuring datasources quickly, this section serves as a quick introduction to datasources and provides you with code references you can test and use if you are already familiar with the basics.

Author: Would this be better?

For rapid configuration of datasources, this section offers a brief overview and code samples for testing and utilization, suitable for users familiar with the fundamentals.

For more advanced configuration with examples, see xref:datasource-reference[Datasource references].

[[dev-services]]
=== Zero-config setup in development mode

> When testing or running in development mode, Quarkus can provide you with a zero-config database, a feature referred to as _Dev Services_.

Author: Ok. Would this formulation do better?

By incorporating the "DevServices" feature, Quarkus enables testing or running in dev mode without the necessity of a configured database. Simply add the extension to your `pom.xml` file, and Quarkus will handle the setup, eliminating the need to start or configure a database

Depending on your database type, a Docker or Podman container runtime needs to be installed to use this feature.
Some databases, for example H2, run in memory and do not require a container runtime.

> To start using Dev Services, include the relevant extension for the type of database you want, such as `jdbc-postgresql`, `reactive-pg-client`, or both.

Author: Will do!

In this scenario, configuring a database URL and setting up a username and password is not needed.

> If you provide the user credentials, Quarkus will configure the underlying database to use them.

Reviewer 4: My understanding is that if you don't provide credentials, Quarkus will add some default username/password pair into the database. If you configure it explicitly, Quarkus will configure the database to use that (and will use these credentials itself for connecting to it). The usage is that if you want to be able to connect to the DB externally via some other tool and you need to know the credentials for that.

> If you provide the user credentials, Quarkus will configure the underlying database to use them.

Author: Thank you @jmartisk for the opinion and also for testing this with PostgreSQL!
I will assume that it works the same for the other db-kinds. Can also ask QE for final verification.

This is useful when you want to connect to the underlying database externally using your tooling.

Quarkus provides the database instance and the necessary connection between the database and the application. 
You can start coding without worrying about configuration.

For more details and optional configurations, see xref:databases-dev-services.adoc[Databases Dev Services].

=== Configure a JDBC datasource

> . Add the `agroal` extension plus one of `jdbc-db2`, `jdbc-derby`, `jdbc-h2`, `jdbc-mariadb`, `jdbc-mssql`, `jdbc-mysql`, `jdbc-oracle` or `jdbc-postgresql`.

Reviewer 5: 1. It's not actually required to add the "agroal extension", we pull it in automatically.
2. Shouldn't we describe also what needs to be done when one wants to use a JDBC driver which isn't in this list?

Reviewer 4: There's a section below dedicated to using unlisted JDBC drivers, so I'd keep this one short. This section is meant to be a "quick reference" to get you started in most common cases.
So, no need to mention Agroal in this section either, IMO.

and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
[id="datasources"]
= Get started with configuring datasources in Quarkus
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: data,getting-started

Learn how to easily configure a Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) and Reactive datasource, their combination, or several datasources if required.

Many Java applications require connections to a relational database.

> The usual way to establish database connections is to combine a data source and a database driver.

Reviewer: Sorry, one more thing:

Regarding the form 'datasource' without the space.  I like how consistent use of term is used, and the general term is mentioned in the introduction.

Would it help to add a note like this?

```suggestion
The usual way to establish database connections is to combine a data source and a database driver.

[Note]
====
The term _data source_ is more commonly referred to as _datasource_ in Quarkus throughout the interfaces and documentation.
====
```

Quarkus supports JDBC and reactive drivers and allows for unified and flexible configurations.

Quarkus supports lightweight link:https://agroal.github.io/[Agroal] datasource and connection pooling implementation for JDBC, as well as link:https://vertx.io/[Vert.x] reactive drivers for reactive approaches.
This provides high performance, scalability, and features integration with the other components in Quarkus,
such as security, health checks, and metrics.

For more details about consuming and using a reactive datasource,
refer to the xref:reactive-sql-clients.adoc[Reactive SQL clients] guide.

> Datasource guide then explains the following:

Author: Will have a look!

Many projects require connections to a relational database.
The usual way to obtain database connections is to use a datasource with a database driver.

* For JDBC, the preferred datasource and connection pooling implementation is https://agroal.github.io/[Agroal].
* For reactive, we use the https://vertx.io/[Vert.x] reactive drivers.
Quarkus supports traditional JDBC and modern reactive drivers and allows for unified and flexible configurations.

Both are configured via unified and flexible configuration.
Quarkus supports lightweight link:https://agroal.github.io/[Agroal] datasource and connection pooling implementation for JDBC, as well as https://vertx.io/[Vert.x] reactive drivers for reactive approaches.
This provides high performance, scalability, and features integration with the other components in Quarkus,
such as security, transaction management components, health, and metrics.

[NOTE]
====
Agroal is a modern, lightweight connection pool implementation designed for very high performance and scalability,
and features first class integration with the other components in Quarkus, such as security, transaction management components, health, and metrics.

> ====

Author: @gsmet Hello. Can we have your point of view on this so that we can decide if we can let this as it is or apply additional tweak?

> ====

Reviewer 6: Transactions in Hibernate Reactive, at least, are very much explicit; I know that for a fact. See https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-reactive#hr-getting-started

They seem to be explicit in Vert.x's postgreSQL client as well: https://quarkus.io/guides/reactive-sql-clients#transactions

This does tend to prove reactive clients are not integrated into Quarkus' transaction management.

IMO either you can get reasonable evidence about the claims you're adding to this documentation, or you should not add these claims.

> ====

Author: Sounds reasonable. Will apply.
 Thank you!

Depending on your database type, a container runtime may be installed to use this feature.

> Some databases, such as H2, run in-memory and do not require a container runtime.

Reviewer 4: By container runtime, we mean Podman or Docker. This is to say that the database will run inside a container, thus we need a container runtime.

> Some databases, such as H2, run in-memory and do not require a container runtime.

Reviewer 6: Btw in this case "a container runtime may be installed to use this feature" is wrong, since (I hope) Quarkus won't install Podman or Docker by itself.

> Some databases, such as H2, run in-memory and do not require a container runtime.

Author: **Needs to be installed** - This is the way :)

> . To start using Dev Services, include the relevant extension for the type of database you want, such as `jdbc-postgresql`, `reactive-pg-client`, or both.

Author: Hello! Thank you for your feedback and overall review. Will to try to apply all of your suggestions made.
 This is not a list with a single item, but a numbered procedural step. Yes, there is only one. There are two options here:
 1) Have a -> **_1. Numbered step_**
 2) Or a bullet-list item (we can use this for a single procedural step, which are normally always displayed as numbered list) -> **_* Single procedural step_**

What should be your pick, @yrodiere ?

> . To start using Dev Services, include the relevant extension for the type of database you want, such as `jdbc-postgresql`, `reactive-pg-client`, or both.

Reviewer 6: It's a good idea to follow similar conventions for every list of steps, but IMO you'd need to add something to your convention to make it stand out more, so that it doesn't look like a formatting mistake in edge cases like this one.

One idea would be to name your lists of steps. This would have the added benefit or clearly stating what the steps do.

I'm not an expert in Asciidoc, but I think something like this should do the trick:

```asciidoc
.To start using dev services:
--
. Include the relevant extension for the type of database you want, such as `jdbc-postgresql`, `reactive-pg-client`, or both.
--
```

> . To start using Dev Services, include the relevant extension for the type of database you want, such as `jdbc-postgresql`, `reactive-pg-client`, or both.

Reviewer 6: Also, maybe in this case different wording would help, such as "Simply include the relevant extension [...]". Anything to clarify that "yes, there's only one step, that's not a mistake from our part".

= Datasources
include::_attributes.adoc[]

> :categories: data

Reviewer: This comment might be a bit early as I see this is the first iteration of restructuring ... but just in case I don't get a chance to say it later...

1. To ensure that this guide shows up right at the top of the doc landing page, add `getting-started` to the category list.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/92924207/236222679-8a791876-2007-4781-bf7a-31ead7fe512a.png)

```suggestion
:categories: data,getting-started
```
Also, use the newer diataxis doc header as per the templates & [contributor guide](https://quarkus.io/guides/doc-reference#document-header).

Author: Great stuff! I am on it.

Author: Cool. I just pushed an update with these changes.

Author: The top of the landing page is good for this doc, since the only think we got about `datasources`, but it is not a tutorial, and only zero-config chapter could be considered as a quick-start. However, user always need to have some experience with all of this, since they are all composed as How-tos.

quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/hibernate_orm_test
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.max-size=16
----

> <1> If you only have a single JDBC extension or are running tests and only have a single test-scoped JDBC extension added, then this is optional.

Reviewer 5: This whole aspect of single test-scoped JDBC seems confusing wording. Could we simplify this to point out that <1> is only required if there's more than one database extension on classpath? (And I don't think it's limited to JDBC).

Author: Will apply, thank you!

quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/hibernate_orm_test
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.max-size=16
----
<1> If you only have a single JDBC extension or are running tests and only have a single test-scoped JDBC extension added, then this is optional.
If only one viable extension is available, Quarkus assumes this is the correct one.
If a driver has been added to the test scope, Quarkus automatically includes the driver in testing.

> === Reactive datasource

Author: ```suggestion
=== Configure a reactive datasource
```

quarkus.datasource.reactive.url=postgresql:///your_database
quarkus.datasource.reactive.max-size=20
----

> <1> This is optional.

Author: Is this the text it refres to?
<1> If you only have a single JDBC extension or are running tests and only have a single test-scoped JDBC extension installed, then this is optional.

If so, maybe there will be a better way to evade the duplication. Could you please propose a better wording for that description or at least point to where it is stated?

> <1> This is optional.

Reviewer 6: > Is this the text it refres to?
> <1> If you only have a single JDBC extension or are running tests and only have a single test-scoped JDBC extension installed, then this is optional.
> 
> If so, maybe there will be a better way to evade the duplication. Could you please propose a better wording for that description or at least point to where it is stated?

Yes.

> Could you please propose a better wording for that description

Could I duplicate it? Well, sure:

```
<1> If you only have a single client extension or are running tests and only have a single test-scoped client extension installed, then this is optional.
If only one viable extension is available, Quarkus assumes this is the correct one.
If a client has been added to the test scope, Quarkus automatically includes the client in testing.
```

== How to configure datasources

The following section describes the configuration for single or mutual datasources.

> For simplicity, we will reference a single datasource as the default (unnamed) datasource.

Reviewer 4: That should be the "for simplicity" part. But yeah maybe it can be made more clear

For simplicity, for single-datasource application, we will not give the datasource a name, so we will use the so-called default datasource..

Don't know if this is better?!

> For simplicity, we will reference a single datasource as the default (unnamed) datasource.

Reviewer 6: For simplicity, I would just omit this sentence :) After all, we're just describing how we think a single-datasource app should be configured, as well as how we think a mult-datasource app should be configured. No need to explain further IMO.

=== Configure a single datasource

A datasource can be either a JDBC datasource, reactive, or both.
This depends on the configuration and the selection of project extensions.

. Define a datasource with the following command:
+
[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.db-kind=h2
----
+
NOTE: This step is required if you have multiple drivers for more than one

> database type installed.

Author: @yrodiere Thank you for such great feedback. This is exactly the reason we need expert's reviews. Will apply what you share and provide the patch.

+

> The database kind defines to which type of database you will connect.

Reviewer 6: Oh no, no need to change it, I was just curious and thought that might be an oversight. If it's your rule it's fine. Thanks.

quarkus.datasource.reactive.url=postgresql:///your_database
quarkus.datasource.reactive.max-size=20
----
<1> This is optional.

== How to configure datasources

> The following section describes the configuration for single or mutual datasources.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following section describes the configuration for single or multiple datasources.
```

Author: Nice one @jmartisk . Will apply.

quarkus.datasource.reactive.url=postgresql:///your_database
quarkus.datasource.reactive.max-size=20
----

> <1> If you only have a single Reactive driver extension or are running tests and only have a single test-scoped Reactive driver extension added, then this is optional.

Reviewer 5: As the previous example, I hope this could be simplified.

* MySQL: `mysql`
* Oracle: `oracle`
* PostgreSQL: `postgresql`, `pgsql` or `pg`
+
Providing Quarkus with the database kind you are targeting simplifies the subsequent configuration.
By using a JDBC driver extension and setting the kind in the configuration,
Quarkus resolves the JDBC driver automatically, so you do not need to configure it yourself.
+
If you want to use a database kind that is not built-in, use `other` and define the JDBC driver explicitly.
+
[NOTE]
====
You can use any JDBC driver in a Quarkus app in JVM mode.
See <<other-databases,Using other databases>>.
However, JVM mode is unlikely to work when compiling your application to a native executable.

If you want to build a native executable, use the existing JDBC Quarkus extensions, or contribute one for your driver.
====

> . Configure the following properties to enable access to your database by defining the following credentials:

Author: Haha, I love this! Yes, thats how we do :) Thank you.

However, JVM mode is unlikely to work when compiling your application to a native executable.

If you want to build a native executable, use the existing JDBC Quarkus extensions, or contribute one for your driver.
====

. Configure the following properties to define credentials:
+
[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.username=<your username>
quarkus.datasource.password=<your password>
----
+
You can also retrieve the password from Vault by link:{vault-datasource-guide}[using a credential provider] for your datasource.

Until now, the configuration has been the same regardless of whether you’re using a JDBC or a reactive driver.
When you have defined the database kind and the credentials, the rest depends on what type of driver you are using.
It is possible to use JDBC and a reactive driver simultaneously.

==== JDBC datasource

JDBC is the most common database connection pattern, typically needed when used in combination with non-reactive Hibernate ORM.

. Add the `quarkus-agroal` dependency to your project:
+
[source,bash]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="agroal"
----
+
[TIP]
====
Agroal comes as a transitive dependency of the Hibernate ORM extension.

> Therefore, the Agroal extension dependency does not have to be added explicitly when Hibernate ORM is in use.

Reviewer 5: It's also a dependency of any JDBC based extension (the non-reactive ones). So for sake of simplicity, we could omit this whole section.
What is useful for people to know is that Agroal is the implementation of the JDBC connection pool, and they should use it when using a custom JDBC driver (not necessary when using our extensions).

Author: Ok, will replace it with this:

Agroal serves as the JDBC connection pool implementation and is designed to be used in conjunction with a custom JDBC driver.

Reviewer 4: > Ok, will replace it with this:
> 
> Agroal serves as the JDBC connection pool implementation and is designed to be used in conjunction with a custom JDBC driver.

No, it's used by the built-in drivers too. The difference is that when you use a built-in JDBC driver extension, you automatically receive the Agroal extension with it. If you use a custom driver, you have to add Agroal explicitly.

Reviewer 5: > Proposal: _Agroal serves as the JDBC connection pool implementation and can be utilized by both custom and built-in JDBC drivers. Using a built-in JDBC driver extension automatically includes the Agroal extension. For custom drivers, Agroal needs to be added explicitly._

+1

* MySQL - `jdbc-mysql`
* Oracle - `jdbc-oracle`
* PostgreSQL - `jdbc-postgresql`

> +

Reviewer 6: Maybe, but I think you forgot a word or two? It would be:

> To use a JDBC driver for another database, **see the section** 'Use a database with no built-in extension or with a different driver'.

Or just `refer to <<some_link,this section>>` if you think integrating the section title is confusing. I don't know.

Also, the NOTE adminition is not aligned properly, it's nested in the last item even though it's not related to that item.

> +

Author: Will patch. Thx for the suggestion.

+
See <<other-databases>> if you want to use a JDBC driver for another database.
+
[NOTE]
====
The H2 and Derby databases can be configured to run in "embedded mode"; however, the Derby extension does not support compiling the embedded database engine into native executables.

Read <<in-memory-databases,Testing with in-memory databases>> for suggestions regarding integration testing.
====

. Install the extension using the `add-extension` command.
+
For example, to install the PostgreSQL driver dependency, run the following command:
+
[source,bash]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="jdbc-postgresql"
----

. Configure the JDBC connection by defining the JDBC URL property:
+
[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/hibernate_orm_test
----
+
[NOTE]
====
Note the `jdbc` prefix in the property name.
All the configuration properties specific to JDBC have the `jdbc` prefix.
For reactive datasources, the prefix is `reactive`.
====
+
[TIP]
====
For more information about the JDBC URL format, refer to the <<jdbc-url,JDBC url reference section>>.
====

> When using one of the built-in datasource kinds, the JDBC driver is resolved automatically to the following values:

Author: I updated the table, tweak it, and then added a table for Reactive too. 
Pushed the commit with a rebase, it should be visible now.

> When using one of the built-in datasource kinds, the JDBC driver is resolved automatically to the following values:

Reviewer 6: Thanks, looking good. But you didn't want to move them to a separate section like I suggested?
FWIW people really don't need this information when getting started, it's really "reference" material.

> When using one of the built-in datasource kinds, the JDBC driver is resolved automatically to the following values:

Author: Wanted to do this in a separate PR, but yeah, for sure, will move it.

such as the connection pool size, refer to the <<jdbc-configuration,JDBC configuration reference>> section.

===== Consuming the datasource

With Hibernate ORM, the Hibernate layer automatically picks the datasource up and use it.

. For the in-code access to the datasource, obtain it as any other bean as follows:
+
[source,java]
----
@Inject
AgroalDataSource defaultDataSource;
----
+
In the above example, the type is `AgroalDataSource`, a `javax.sql.DataSource` subtype.
Because of this, you can also use `javax.sql.DataSource` as the injected type.

==== Reactive datasource

If you prefer using a reactive datasource, Quarkus offers DB2, MariaDB/MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server, Oracle, and PostgreSQL reactive clients.

. Install the corresponding database extension:
+
* DB2: `quarkus-reactive-db2-client`
* MariaDB/MySQL: `quarkus-reactive-mysql-client`
* Microsoft SQL Server: `quarkus-reactive-mssql-client`
* Oracle: `quarkus-reactive-oracle-client`
* PostgreSQL: `quarkus-reactive-pg-client`
+
The installed extension must be consistent with the `quarkus.datasource.db-kind` you define in your datasource configuration.

> . After installing the driver, configure the connection URL and define a proper size for your connection pool.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
. After adding the driver, configure the connection URL and define a proper size for your connection pool.
```

You will usually specify the `db-kind` property or explicitly enable Dev Services by setting `quarkus.datasource."name".devservices.enabled=true`.

[[in-memory-databases]]
=== Testing with in-memory databases

Some databases like H2 and Derby are commonly used in the _embedded mode_ as a facility to run integration tests quickly.

It is recommended to use the real database you intend to use in production, but it’s possible to use JVM-powered databases for the scenarios when the ability to run quick integration tests is required.

NOTE: While configuring Derby to use the embedded engine works as usual in JVM mode, such an application will not compile into a native executable. It is because Quarkus Derby extensions do not support embedding the entire database engine into a native executable, and it only covers making the JDBC client code compatible with the native compilation step.

==== Support and limitations

Embedded databases (H2 and Derby) work in JVM mode.
For native mode, the following limitations apply:

* Derby cannot be embedded into the application in native mode, and only remote connection is supported.

> * H2 can be embedded into the application in native mode, but this is considered experimental.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[IMPORTANT]
====
Embedding H2 within your native image is not recommended. 
Consider using an alternative approach, for example, using a remote connection to a separate database instead.
====
```

> We recommend carefully considering alternatives (remote connection to a separate database, etc.) before embedding H2 within your native image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You will usually specify the `db-kind` property or explicitly enable Dev Services by setting `quarkus.datasource."name".devservices.enabled=true`.

[[in-memory-databases]]
=== Testing with in-memory databases

Some databases like H2 and Derby are commonly used in the _embedded mode_ as a facility to run integration tests quickly.

It is recommended to use the real database you intend to use in production, but it’s possible to use JVM-powered databases for the scenarios when the ability to run quick integration tests is required.

NOTE: While configuring Derby to use the embedded engine works as usual in JVM mode, such an application will not compile into a native executable. It is because Quarkus Derby extensions do not support embedding the entire database engine into a native executable, and it only covers making the JDBC client code compatible with the native compilation step.

==== Support and limitations

Embedded databases (H2 and Derby) work in JVM mode.
For native mode, the following limitations apply:

* Derby cannot be embedded into the application in native mode, and only remote connection is supported.
[IMPORTANT]
====

> Embedding H2 within your native image is not recommended. 

Reviewer 7: Is there any more detail on why this is not recommended? See https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/6320#issuecomment-2157743619

Reviewer 6: As far as I know, just because of uncertainty regarding bugs, feature coverage, performance. It started out as something experimental and didn't change much since then.

We haven't had many bug reports either, so you can interpret that any way you like: either nobody uses H2 in native images, or it works fine.

quarkus.datasource.inventory.jdbc.max-size=12
----

Notice there is an extra section in the configuration key.
The syntax is as follows: `quarkus.datasource.[optional name.][datasource property]`.

NOTE: Even when only one database extension is installed, named databases need to specify at least one build-time property so that Quarkus can detect them.
Generally, this is the `db-kind` property, but you can also

> specify Dev Services properties to create named datasources (covered later in this guide).

Reviewer 6: Dev services are not covered in this guide, but in another one (`xref:databases-dev-services.adoc`).

==== Named Datasource Injection

When using multiple datasources, each `DataSource` also has the `io.quarkus.agroal.DataSource` qualifier with the name of the datasource as the value.

> . Using the above-mentoned properties to configure three different datasources, inject each one as follows:

Reviewer 6: Again, is this really intended as a single-item list?

Author: All of these are numbered procedural steps. Sometimes, it is a shame that there is only one, but regarding the way tech docs are written in RH, we need to address them with a number (for single or several steps) or a star (to make it a single-item bullet list - for a single step)

To disable metrics for a particular data source,
set `quarkus.datasource.jdbc.enable-metrics` to `false`, or apply `quarkus.datasource.<datasource name>.jdbc.enable-metrics` for a named datasource.
This disables collecting the metrics and exposing them in the `/q/metrics` endpoint if the mechanism to collect them is disabled.

Conversely, setting `quarkus.datasource.jdbc.enable-metrics` to `true`, or `quarkus.datasource.<datasource name>.jdbc.enable-metrics` for a named datasource explicitly enables metrics collection even if a metrics extension is not in use.
This can be useful if you need to access the collected metrics programmatically.
They are available after calling `dataSource.getMetrics()` on an injected `AgroalDataSource` instance.

If the metrics collection for this datasource is disabled, all values result to zero.

=== Narayana transaction manager integration

Integration is automatic if the Narayana JTA extension is also available.

You can override this by setting the `transactions` configuration property.
See the <<configuration-reference, Configuration Reference>> section below.

==== Named datasources

> When using Dev Services, the default datasource will always be created, but to specify a named datasource, you need to have at least one build time property so Quarkus can detect how to create the datasource.

Reviewer 6: This seems unrelated to Narayana, and feels like a repeat from a previous note ("NOTE: Even when only one database extension is installed [...]").

I'd say this should be removed?

Reviewer 6: Any opinion here? The section "Named datasources" within "Narayana transaction manager integration" really looks out of place and repeats what's already being said elsewhere.

You will usually specify the `db-kind` property or explicitly enable Dev Services by setting `quarkus.datasource."name".devservices.enabled=true`.

[[in-memory-databases]]
=== Testing with in-memory databases

Some databases like H2 and Derby are commonly used in the _embedded mode_ as a facility to run integration tests quickly.

It is recommended to use the real database you intend to use in production, but it’s possible to use JVM-powered databases for the scenarios when the ability to run quick integration tests is required.

> Note that while configuring Derby to use the embedded engine works as usual in JVM mode, such an application will not compile into a native executable, because the Quarkus extensions only cover making the JDBC client code compatible with the native compilation step.
> Embedding the entire database engine into a native executable is currently not implemented.

Reviewer 6: This probably shouldn't be two sentences, as the explaination from the first sentence is in the second one.

Maybe:

```suggestion
Note that while configuring Derby to use the embedded engine works as usual in JVM mode, such an application will not compile into a native executable, because the Quarkus Derby extensions does not support embedding the entire database engine into a native executable: it only cover making the JDBC client code compatible with the native compilation step.
```

Author: Thank you! Will apply this in slightly modified version

> Compiling H2 into a native image is now possible, but this is considered experimental; even if technically possible,

Reviewer 6: Repetition of "possible" in the next sentence.

```suggestion
Compiling H2 into a native image is considered experimental: even if technically possible,
```

Author: Applying

> We recommend carefully considering why you want to embed H2 within your native image.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
we recommend carefully considering why you want to embed H2 within your native image.
```

> Running integration tests with embedded Derby or H2 in the JVM mode works as expected in this scenario, but they will not work in native mode.

Reviewer 6: Didn't we just state that it would work with H2?

Author: Well, I think we had 3 instances like this in the doc and I was really not sure what the original author thought with this. I would always stay what works when and vice versa.

Reviewer 6: Okay, but this line is new and FWIU it directly contradicts the line literally just above... ?

Above:

> Compiling H2 into a native image is [...] technically possible

Here:

> Running integration tests with embedded Derby or H2 [...] will not work in native mode

---

To be constructive, from what I understand:

* With Derby, it doesn't work.
* With H2, it used not to work, but nowadays it does.

Author: Thank you! Applying.

}
----

> . Connect to it using:

Reviewer: Specify the what (it) here.

+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.db-kind=h2
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=jdbc:h2:tcp://localhost/mem:test
----

[[datasource-reference]]
== References

[[configuration-reference]]
=== Common datasource configuration reference

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-datasource.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

[[jdbc-configuration]]
=== JDBC configuration reference

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-agroal.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

[[jdbc-url]]

> === JDBC URL reference

Reviewer: Possibly for a later iteration, could the content in the  ==== headings be restructured into a table for comparison?

Each of the supported databases contains different JDBC URL configuration options.
The following section gives an overview of each database URL and a link to the official documentation.

==== DB2

`jdbc:db2://<serverName>[:<portNumber>]/<databaseName>[:<key1>=<value>;[<key2>=<value2>;]]`

Example:: `jdbc:db2://localhost:50000/MYDB:user=dbadm;password=dbadm;`

For more information on URL syntax and additional supported options, see the link:https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSEPGG_11.5.0/com.ibm.db2.luw.apdv.java.doc/src/tpc/imjcc_r0052342.html[official documentation].

==== Derby

`jdbc:derby:[//serverName[:portNumber]/][memory:]databaseName[;property=value[;property=value]]`

Example:: `jdbc:derby://localhost:1527/myDB`, `jdbc:derby:memory:myDB;create=true`

> Derby is an embedded database.

Reviewer: Combine 522 and 533: 
```suggestion
Derby is an embedded database that can run as a server, based on a file, or can run completely in memory.
```

> It can run as a server, based on a file, or run completely in memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

All of these options are available as listed above.

For more information, see the link:https://db.apache.org/derby/docs/10.8/devguide/cdevdvlp17453.html#cdevdvlp17453[official documentation].

==== H2

`jdbc:h2:{ {.|mem:}[name] | [file:]fileName | {tcp|ssl}:[//]server[:port][,server2[:port]]/name }[;key=value...]`

Example:: `jdbc:h2:tcp://localhost/~/test`, `jdbc:h2:mem:myDB`

> H2 is an embedded database.

Reviewer: Merge with 535?

* The integration with OCI is not supported.

==== Oracle

`jdbc:oracle:driver_type:@database_specifier`

Example:: `jdbc:oracle:thin:@localhost:1521/ORCL_SVC`

For more information, see the link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/21/jjdbc/data-sources-and-URLs.html#GUID-AEA8E228-1B21-4111-AF4C-B1F33744CA08[official documentation].

==== PostgreSQL

`jdbc:postgresql:[//][host][:port][/database][?key=value...]`

Example:: `jdbc:postgresql://localhost/test`

The defaults for the different parts are as follows:

`host`:: localhost
`port`:: 5432
`database`:: same name as the username

For more information about additional parameters, see the link:https://jdbc.postgresql.org/documentation/head/connect.html[official documentation].

[[extensions-and-database-drivers-reference]]
=== Quarkus extensions and database drivers reference

The below tables list the built-in db-kind values, the corresponding Quarkus extensions, and the JDBC drivers used by those extensions.

When using one of the built-in datasource kinds, the JDBC and Reactive drivers are resolved automatically to match the values from these tables.

> .Database kind to JDBC driver mapping

Reviewer 4: I've never heard "database platform" used in this context, that's something a bit different. It's usually called "type" or "kind", or possibly "vendor". I'd suggest we stick with what the configuration model says, "kind"..

> .Database kind to JDBC driver mapping

Reviewer: @jmartisk - Thank you for clarifying :+1: 
For info findability, the main thing is that we use the most popular terms in the discipline that someone who doesn't know Quarkus really well yet would use to find info on how to configure their preferred database kind/type.

> .Database kind to JDBC driver mapping

Reviewer 5: Let's rework the title as "Database platform kind to JDBC driver mapping" ?
So it better expressed what we mean by kind, and make it findable too

}
----

This will allow you to test your application even when it is compiled into a native executable while the database will run as a JVM process.

> * Connect to it using:

Reviewer 6: Single-item list again.

Author: Yes, this is the single-item list this time. The convention is right, however, you are right that this should be a numbered step to be consistent with the rest of the doc. Will patch it.

Example:: `jdbc:derby://localhost:1527/myDB`, `jdbc:derby:memory:myDB;create=true`

Derby is an embedded database.
It can run as a server, based on a file, or run completely in memory.
All of these options are available as listed above.
You can find more information in the link:https://db.apache.org/derby/docs/10.8/devguide/cdevdvlp17453.html#cdevdvlp17453[official documentation].

==== H2

`jdbc:h2:{ {.|mem:}[name] | [file:]fileName | {tcp|ssl}:[//]server[:port][,server2[:port]]/name }[;key=value...]`

Example:: `jdbc:h2:tcp://localhost/~/test`, `jdbc:h2:mem:myDB`

H2 is an embedded database.
It can run as a server, based on a file, or run completely in memory.
All of these options are available as listed above.

You can find more information in the link:https://h2database.com/html/features.html?highlight=url&search=url#database_url[official documentation].

==== MariaDB

`jdbc:mariadb:[replication:|failover:|sequential:|aurora:]//<hostDescription>[,<hostDescription>...]/[database][?<key1>=<value1>[&<key2>=<value2>]]`
hostDescription:: `<host>[:<portnumber>] or address=(host=<host>)[(port=<portnumber>)][(type=(master|slave))]`

Example:: `jdbc:mariadb://localhost:3306/test`

> More information about this feature and others is detailed in the link:https://mariadb.com/kb/en/library/about-mariadb-connector-j/[official documentation].

Reviewer 6: Any reason for using different phrasing for the "more information" sentence for H2 and MariaDB?

And FWIW, the next sections use yet another phrasing.

Author: I just used a minimalist version of the original sentence. For this content to be ever used as corporate docs (downstream version), some actions, such as the elimination of You can, you should, please, might, and so on....should be replaced with something that is OK with the IBM style guide, and yet not breaking the original intention. Yes, this is not the funny part at all :)

Reviewer 6: Okay but you kept "You can find more information" for H2, that's why I found this change odd.

And I found it odd that some changes use "More information about this feature and others is detailed" and some use "More details can be found". I thought you'd want to use consistent phrasing, while you are at it.

Author: Exactly. My appologies, I had this changes in a commit but I havent pushed it. I just applied the commit and rebased. The suggestion  I resolved are now applied.

hostDescription:: `<host>[:<portnumber>] or address=(host=<host>)[(port=<portnumber>)][(type=(master|slave))]`

Example:: `jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/test`

More information about this feature and others is detailed in the link:https://dev.mysql.com/doc/connector-j/8.0/en/connector-j-reference.html[official documentation].

===== MySQL Limitations

When compiling a Quarkus application to a native image, the MySQL support for JMX and Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (OCI) integrations are disabled as they are incompatible with GraalVM native images.

* The lack of JMX support is a natural consequence of running in native mode and is unlikely to be resolved.
* The integration with OCI is not supported.

==== Oracle

`jdbc:oracle:driver_type:@database_specifier`

Example:: `jdbc:oracle:thin:@localhost:1521/ORCL_SVC`

More details can be found in the link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/21/jjdbc/data-sources-and-URLs.html#GUID-AEA8E228-1B21-4111-AF4C-B1F33744CA08[official documentation].

==== PostgreSQL

PostgreSQL and the rest of the databases mentioned below run only as a server.

> As such, specify connection details or use the defaults.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure what this means. Maybe it's meant as opposed to H2 that can run in embedded mode? If so, I'd remove this sentence: it's confusing, unnecessary and not in the right place since some of the DBs above (Oracle, MySQL, ...) also cannot be embedded.

Author: I am not the author of the original text, but by applying what you shared here:

As opposed to H2 that can run in embedded mode, PostgreSQL and the rest of the databases mentioned below run only as a server.
As such, specify connection details or use the defaults.

Would that work, or are you for dropping lines 610 and 611 completely? 
@yrodiere

Reviewer 6: As stated above it's not just the content, it's also just incorrect as there are also DBs mentioned *above* that only run as a server.

Making it right would be more work than it's worth, so let's just drop it?

Author: OFC, will do. One sec.
